this video is sponsored by blinkist
it is very early january here at the end
of my first day back at work after
christmas
and my brain is just not in the swing of
things at
all yeah like my current draft of my
paper i'm writing about my current
research is just sat there open
on my computer i didn't type a single
thing today and the cursor is just
blinking at me like write something
anything
instead i figured let's have some fun
and react
to some space and astronomy memes
because
why not we might learn something in the
process
i haven't seen any of these sam has
picked them all out for me
so let's just dive on into this all
right first one
how i see the moon versus how much so
excuse it
oh my god that's so true
right like how many times have you done
that i mean i i know that it will do
that i know the reasons why it does that
and yeah i still break my phone out
every time in the hope
that it will turn out different right
there's two reasons this happened the
first one is because phones have
really small detectors which is a good
thing because then they fit in our
pockets
but it means that their dynamic range is
very small so the dynamic range is
essentially
the difference between the brightest
thing and the darkest thing
that a camera can detect so when we snap
pics on our phone you know they're
designed for
landscapes and selfies where the light
is distributed you know fairly
evenly but when you have something like
the moon which is incredibly bright
again something very
dark like the sky and you have a camera
with a low dynamic range it can't tell
the difference really between something
that's that bright and that dark so you
just end up with a white circle against
a black background
the second reason is because phones are
designed to have wide angle cameras
right they're designed to mimic sort of
what we see
so the angle that sort of phones tend to
see is about 90 degrees sort of of your
vision the moon is only half a degree in
the sky you know the whole like you can
block
out with your thumb if you hold the arms
length that's only half a degree
so it only takes up what one over 180th
of your photo which is why it ends up
looking so
tiny in the photo at the end no matter
how big it appears to your eyes which
are comparing them
compared to like a house or a tree in
the foreground right and it gives it
that sort of warp sense of
of perspective even knowing that i still
don't feel any better
every time my photos look so bad pluto
has a heart-shaped sea that's filled
with poisonous ice
don't we
oh kudos to you kashana i mean i still
kind of can't believe that like the new
horizons mission like when it did its
fly by pluto like got this level of
detail
in this image just i think just
comparing it to like the previous best
image we had
of pluto right which was that like dirty
fuzz blob of
pixels from the hubble space telescope
like it's so much more detail than we'd
ever been able
to see before and this heart thing has
been dubbed sputnik plunicia
by the research team which i love it's
you know after sputnik the first
satellite
it's actually a glacier made of nitrogen
as well
and the thing that i love about it is
that despite the fact that pluto is you
know a piddly not even a planet right
it's a dwarf planet
that glacier is the largest galacia in
the solar system so i guess pluto still
had the last laugh
one day on mercury lasts about 148 hours
the same
one one day on earth
uh yep uh been there in fact been there
today as well
it's always been one of my favorite
things to like compare and contrast like
the properties
of the planets in the solar system
remember i had this big fact file when i
was a kid
which was like my favorite book and i'd
pour over it and i remember being like
fascinated that
venus has a day
which is about like 5 000 plus hours or
something and it's longer
than it's year like the time it takes to
go around the sun so the idea that there
would just be this like
permanent like day side on venus
and like a permanent night side because
it's pretty much rotating
at the exact right speed to always keep
one side facing the sun so the same way
that like we only ever see one side of
the moon because it
rotates at the exact same speed to
always keep that side
facing us it's called tidal locking i
know that now but as a kid i was just
like
whoa can you imagine living on a planet
like that where there's like a permanent
day side but
because it takes 24 hours longer it's
not perfectly locked like the moon is
like you it would just slowly change
year on year like which was the day side
and which was the night side
like can you imagine that like i imagine
like winter is coming it's like a big
thing
on venus and winter is coming remember
the sun baby from the teletubbies
this is him now feel old yeah
i used to watch the teletubbies with my
sister i know i love this
and i hate to have to poo poo on it but
i just want to point out
the sun will not become a black hole
when it runs out of fuel
and dies it will become a white dwarf it
won't even actually go supernova it'll
just
shed its outer layers and become a
planetary nebula with a white dwarf
in the center it would need to be about
30 times heavier
to become a black hole at the end of its
life but
i'll give the authors of this meme a
pass because it's
hilarious according to astronomy when
you worship on the star you are actually
a few million years late that star is
dead
i mean i've seen this making the rounds
around the internet for a few years now
and i'm just like
oh no not really like i don't find it
funny because i know that it's not true
because
all the stars that you can see in the
night sky
they're all in the milky way right
they're all in our galaxy and the milky
way is only a hundred thousand light
years across
but really we don't see all the stars
because we're not going to see the
faintest ones further away at least with
our own eyes there's something like
4 000 stars or something that you can
see with the naked eye so none of those
are gonna be that far away they're gonna
be max
like 10 000 light years away
and even like the brightest the biggest
the shortest live stars you know the
blue big blue stars
they live fast die young but they still
last for you know
hundreds of thousands of years and the
longest live stars they're like the
coolest little red stars they live for
billions of years like even the ones
that formed right at the beginning of
the universe just after the big bang
they're like still around you know
they're gonna be around for a long time
still yet
as well so chances are if you're picking
a random star in the night sky to wish
upon like it's still gonna be there
unless of course if you're wishing on a
shooting star which is not a star at all
it's just like a lump of
rock that's falling to earth and burning
up in the earth's atmosphere and yeah
okay within seconds we'll be
disintegrated
then yeah you you start you wishing upon
still going to be there
yay spongebob primordial black holes
stellar mass black holes
super massive black holes quasars
right so i think sam's included this
because he knows that buff spongebob
mean is
one of my favorites but it's also about
black holes as well like my one true
astrophysics love so primordial black
holes
are these really really tiny black holes
they're formed in the very very early
universe when you've just got this like
soup of hydrogen
and you get sort of like various
different particles clumping together so
you get fluctuations in how
dense certain areas of the universe are
and you might end up with
one area becoming dense enough to create
a black hole that
is absolutely you know tiny you know the
size of
tennis balls and smaller kind of thing
whereas then you've got stellar mass
black holes which is what you get at the
end of a supernova when a star that's
maybe 30 times the mass of the sun and
above
runs out of fuel and dies then a
supermassive black hole is what you find
at the very
center of galaxies in there anywhere
from sort of a million times the mass of
the sun
to you know a billion times the mass of
the sun and
above that's what i study bloody love
them and
then you've got quasars which are
growing
supermassive black holes but growing at
like an incredible
incredible rate so what's happening is
that the material around the black hole
is spiraling so so so fast
that it heats up due to friction and it
starts to
glow and some of that material is
actually ejected from the vicinity
around the black hole not the black hole
itself but from the surrounding regions
just because the pressure is so great
and also gets thrown back off and we can
see that from the light that it emits so
quasars are some of the brightest
objects in the universe
despite the fact that they're a black
hole and i think the little buff
spongebob
representation there it's all i'm gonna
think of now
when i think about quasars uh kepler186f
that's
searching for most earth like planet
four five to be
i feel like this is such a niche
meme like the kind that would be like
posted on the exoplanet research group's
office door
and like the department so that everyone
who came to like visit them would get a
little
chuckle out of it like for those who
maybe are a little bit confused
kepler-186f was
one of like the first earth-sized planet
found
in the habitable zone around it starts
there was a lot of
buzz created like when that was actually
found in the habitable zone being like
the area that's like not too hot and
like not too cold for life it doesn't
mean that like
we could exist there or life definitely
exists there
it just means that like life as we know
it probably would have been able
to develop because of the conditions
and if i remember right kepler-186f was
very similar to earth like the planet
was
but the star it was orbiting was not
similar to the sun at all it was like a
red dwarf star so the planet was like
orbiting like a lot closer in it had a
much shorter year
whereas like a year or two later when
kepler-452b
was discovered that was found around
a sun-like star like a very similar star
to the sun
it had very very similar properties to
the earth as well and it just very
quickly usurped kepler-186f
as like the most earth-like planet
although i think there's a lot of people
arguing now that it's
a bit more like a super earth because
it's a bit sort of heavier and
bigger and meatier but like i wouldn't
get
too excited or anything because like i'm
pretty sure that it's like over a
thousand
light years away so don't get like too
excited about visiting it because
the journey would take you like over a
million years alright last one
[Laughter]
this is my favorite by far this is why
he's left it till last i am
such a huge avengers fan like i mean i'm
practically a real life jane foster
right like she's an astrophysicist who
studies black holes
like you know when are they going to put
me in the film flame out when's chris
hemsworth going to fall through my sky
that's what i want to know
you're all not worthy so this meme is
referencing the fact that pluto was
downgraded from being a planet
all back in the mid 2000s like 2006
or something and that's because in the
early 2000s we were finding all of these
other objects in our solar system that
were
very similar in size to pluto and the
question was
you know does our solar system grow from
having nine planets to 15 planets 20
planets do we start adding all of these
objects together so
the international astronomical union
that governs this kind of thing sort of
brought a load of experts together for a
meeting to decide on the official
definition of a planet and therefore
figure out what qualified
as being a planet and what didn't sort
of distinguishing them from you know the
rest of the rubble in the solar system
like the asteroids and comets and all of
these pluto-sized
bodies and they came up with three rules
to define
you know what a planet is the first rule
is that it has to be orbiting
the sun fairly simple the second one is
that the object has to be in hydrostatic
equilibrium
which essentially means it has to be
massive enough for gravity
to have been able to shape that object
into something round so that essentially
gravity is equal everywhere on
the surface so instead of looking you
know kind of like
potato shaped like some of the asteroids
and maybe moons of certain planets do
it has to look you know nice and round
and the third one is that it has to have
cleared its orbit it has to be like the
most
dominant thing along its orbit around
the sun and that's the one that pluto
fails on because you know pluto even
crosses the orbit
of neptune and also crosses the orbit of
lots of other what we call
trans-neptunian objects
out beyond the orbit of neptune as well
so
that's why pluto was downgraded and i
know people feel
so strongly about this and we were so
upset at the time which is probably
where this meme
has come from it's still that leftover
rage that pluto was downgraded
but if you're going to include pluto and
your list of planets you've got to
include the likes of
series and sedna and eris and make make
and all the other dwarf planets that
probably no one's ever heard of so you
know
you can't have one without the others
all right that was
so much fun if there's other like space
or astronomy themed
memes that you think i'll get a laugh
out of send them my way over on social
media just help me
extend my procrastination for the rest
of this week and by easing back into
what it feels like
to work a full week again but in the
meantime
i mean i better hop to this research
paper because
it's still staring at me that curse is
still blinking away
you know what it's not going to ride
itself is it
i just want to take a minute to thank
this week's video sponsor blinkist
blinkist
takes non-fiction books and condenses
them down into little 15-minute briefs
with all the highlights which you can
then
read or listen to podcast style on your
phone
so my new year's resolution this year
for 2021 was to
learn more and to read more about things
that i just don't know
anything about but if you like me you're
going to be busy you don't really have a
lot of time
so i've been using blinkist to whittle
it down essentially and decide
which books i do want to fully read like
why we sleep by matthew walker which
talks about
the science of sleep why we do it why we
dream and what happens to our bodies
physically when we don't get enough of
it
so if you want to check blinkist out
head to blinkist.com forward slash dr
becky that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y
the link is in the description below the
first 100 people to go
there are going to be able to get
unlimited access to blinkist for a whole
week to try out completely free
and if you then decide to go and do the
full membership at the end of that week
you'll also get
25 off as well so i'm really hoping that
that will
help some of you out with your new
year's resolutions if they're learning
based
like mine so thank you very much to
blinkist
i mean it's still incredible to me that
we got that level of detail
from the new horizons mission was it did
its flyby of pluto like thinking back on
like
the best image we had at pluto before
right from the hubble space telescope it
was just this like
dirty fl flush bob was bob's a word